Until recently, the EU mandatory regulations for new cars would appear to be a resounding success for CO2 standards. The rate of reduction in official average tailpipe CO2 values of new passenger cars in the EU increased from roughly 1% per year to more than 3% per year after their introduction in 2009. However, two factors mean this success is not all that it appears.
Firstly, there has been no improvement in tailpipe emissions in the UK since 2015 and average level of CO2 emissions of new cars sold in September 2018 was 128.3 gCO2/ km, the highest recorded since July 2013. A switch away from diesel only accounts for a small proportion of this increase, the main culprit being the swing over the past decade towards larger passenger cars, particularly SUVs (dual purpose vehicles) while the rest of the market declines (SMMT, 2018). SUVs now account for around a quarter of car sales in the UK with no sign of slowing down. Somewhat shockingly, this proportion holds true for electric vehicles (BEVs + PHEVs) – 25% of all the 32,048 plug-in cars registered by the end of 2017 comprised one make and model only (Mitsubishi Outlander) – an SUV in the form of a PHEV and one of the most polluting cars on the road when not driven on the electric battery. 
Secondly, although the above figures suggest a 30% reduction in tailpipe CO2 emissions since 2000, these are based on test cycle measurements. In practice, there has only been an estimated 9% reduction in tailpipe emissions in real-world conditions, and only 4% since 2010. The performance gap between official and real-world values has grown over time, standing at 42% in 2016 (Teitge et al, 2017), although this gap has now stabilised. This gap has effectively negated any reported savings from efficiency improvements over the past decade. 
The regulatory failure of the test cycle versus real-world emissions was not mentioned in the CGS but was addressed in the narrative of the subsequent R2Z which frequently noted it would be considering “real-world” emissions. A new test procedure, the Worldwide Harmonized Light Vehicles Test Procedure (WLTP), is being currently being phased in. Whilst a step in the right direction, the WLTP is not a silver bullet and will not close the performance gap on its own. The discrepancy matters to how meaningful the regulatory or stretched targets are and thus how quickly forward projections will be met. Whilst it could be argued that if electricity is zero carbon this should not matter, the energy efficiency of the transport system is an important issue in its own right and will become more important as vehicles play a key part of the electricity storage solution to balance electricity demands on the grid.

